# Embedded Learning Library (ELL) style guide
This is the C++ coding style guide for the ELL project.

## File names and extensions
Header files use the extension ".h". Source code files use the extension ".cpp" if they are compiled into a .lib or .exe, and ".tcc" if they contain templated source code.
Each file should typically contain a single class and its name should match the class name.

## Projects
A project is a set of source files that compile into a single executable or library, or that implement a single template library.

### Project naming:  
Projects have camelCase names, preferrably single word, such as "model", "utilities", "compile".

### Directory, namespace, output naming:  
All of the source code in a project should be defined in a namespace that shares the project name. All of the source files associated with a project should be contained in a directory that shares the project name. The executable or library generated by a project should share the project name. 

### Project directory structure:  
Each project is contained in a directory. The directory contains a CMakeLists.txt file. The directory typically contains the following subdirectories:

* "include", for h files
* "src" for cpp files (unless the project defines a template library without cpp files)
* "tcc" for tcc files (these define implementaitons of template classes)
* "test" for source files that define unit tests, invoked via ctest
* "doc" for documentation that does not fit in the source files themselves. For example, complex mathy algorithms may require detailed documentation in a latex file, which would live in the doc directory

Additionally, the directory can contain a README.md file.  

## Naming
Names should be descriptive and self-evident, rather than terse. Use whole words rather than abbreviations. Example: use `GetFunctionDefinition` instead of `GetFuncDef`. Exceptions to this rule are:

* Use "Num" as abbreviation for "Number"
* Use `Size` for a member function that returns the size of an object (instead of `GetSize`)

Classes, structs, enum classes:
use PascalCase, e.g., `class MyClass {};`

use camelCase for name of enum values e.g., `enum MyEnum { valueOne, valueTwo };`

Functions, member and non-member:  
use PascalCase, e.g., `int GetValue() const { return _value; }`  

When possible, function names should be imperative mood verbs, e.g., `GetValue()` and `Permute()`. Specifically, accessor member functions should start with `Get`, e.g., `GetOutputVector()`. 
Exceptions to this rule are:

* member functions that returns the size of an object, which can simply be `Size()`
* type conversion functions, which can start with `To`, e.g., `ToString()`
* functions that return the number of elements in a collection, which can start with `Num`, e.g. `NumVariables()`

Method and Function arguments: camelCase: e.g., `int GetValue(int rowIndex, int columnIndex);`

Member variables:
Use `_` (underscore) followed by camelCase, e.g., `_myMemberVariable`

Template typenames: 
Use PascalCase and add the suffix "Type", e.g., `template <typename SparseVectorType>`

Template variables that are not typenames: Use camelCase, e.g., `template <size_t size>`

## File structure
All source code files should start with a header that specifies project name, file name, and author list (see example below)

.h files should indicate `#pragma once` immediately after the header

Next, indicate all `#include` statements. First, include files from the local project. Second, include files from other projects, grouping by project and adding the project name as a comment. Finally, include standard libraries.

    //////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////// 
    // 
    //  Project:  Embedded Learning Library (ELL)
    //  File:     FileName.h (libraryName)
    //  Authors:  Author1, Author2
    //
    //////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////// 

    #pragma once

    #include "OtherClassFromThisProject.h"

    // proj1
    #include "ClassFromProjectProj1.h"
    #include "AnotherClassFromProj1.h"

    // proj2
    #include "ClassFromProj2.h"

    // stl
    #include <vector>
    #include <string>

In certain cases, normal `#ifndef`-style include guards are required instead of using `#pragma once`. In this case, add the guard name
in a comment after the `#endif`:

    #ifndef MATRIX_H
    #define MATRIX_H

    ...

    #endif // MATRIX_H

## Function implementations
Almost all function implementations belong in .cpp and .tcc files. The exception is short single-instruction implementations of parameterless functions, which should appear in the .h file on the same line as the function declaration. For example:

    double GetValue() const { return _value; }  // inline implementation in .h file

    double SetValue(double value);  // function has parameters - implementation belongs in .cpp or .tcc file

    void Next() { _iterator++; _count++; }  // wrong: multi-instruction implementations belong in .cpp or .tcc files

    int GetIndex()  // wrong: inline implementation should occupy a single line
    {
        return _index;
    }

## Formatting
Use clang-format to enforce correct formatting. Use the definitions in the file `.clang-format`, which is found in the main project directory. 

## Documentation
All public classes, functions, and variables that are declared in .h files should be preceded by an XML documentation block. The only exception is functions that are defined with =default or =delete, which should not be documented. Each documentation row should begin with three slashes (///) and the first line in a documentation block should contain a summary tag. Follow this example:

    /// <summary> Mathematical power operation. </summary>
    ///
    /// <param name="base"> The base number. </param>
    /// <param name="exponent"> The exponent number. </param>
    ///
    /// <returns> Base number to the power of the exponent number. </returns>
    double Power(double base, double exponent);

    /// <summary> Performs an in-place sort. </summary>
    ///
    /// <typeparam name="RandomAccessContainerType"> The container type, which must implement a square bracket operator. </typeparam>
    /// <param name="container"> [in,out] The container being sorted. </param>
    template<typename RandomAccessContainerType>
    void InplaceSort(RandomAccessContainerType& container);




