---
layout: home
title: The Embedded Learning Library
---
 
The Embedded Learning Library (ELL) is an early preview of the embedded AI and Machine Learning technologies developed by Microsoft Research. ELL allows you to design intelligent models and deploy them onto small single-board computers, like Raspberry Pi, Arduino, and micro:bit. The intelligent pipeline runs locally on the single-board computer, without requiring a network connection and without relying on servers in the cloud. 

We built ELL for makers, tech enthusiasts, students, entrepeneurs, and developers who aspire to build intelligent devices and gadgets. Our tools, our code, and all of the other resources available on this website are free for anyone to adapt and use. Just keep in mind that ELL is a work in progress and that we expect it change it (and possibly break it) often.

ELL is a software library, written in modern C++, with an interface in Python. ELL can be downloaded from our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/Microsoft/ELL), either as a [zip file](https://github.com/Microsoft/ELL/archive/master.zip), or with the following clone command:

    git clone https://github.com/Microsoft/ELL.git

ELL is deigned to run on your PC or laptop, not on your single-board computer. On the other hand, the intelligent models generated by ELL are designed to run on your single-board computer. Technically, you can think of ELL as a cross-compiler for embedded intelligence - the compiler itself runs on your PC to generate machine code that runs on your single-board computer. ELL is compatible with Windows, Ubuntu, and Mac OSX.  

## Installing and building ELL

The setup instructions for ELL are customized for each development platform you may choose, we currently support Mac, Linux and Windows.
See [Installing and building ELL](/ELL/Installing-and-building-ELL/).  

## Getting Started

Once installed a great place to learn about ELL is with our [tutorials section](/ELL/tutorials). As we develop and release new functionality in ELL, we also publish tutorials that showcase that functionality. Our first tutorial teaches you to build a simple image recognizer with a Raspberry Pi and a camera. Have fun!

## The ELL Gallery

Our [gallery](/ELL/gallery) is a collection of bits and pieces that you can download and use in your projects. Currently, the gallery includes a handful of pre-trained computer vision models and instructions for 3D printing an [active cooling attachment](/ELL/gallery/RPi-cooling) for your Raspberry Pi.

## License

ELL is released under the [MIT Open Source License](https://github.com/Microsoft/ELL/blob/master/LICENSE.txt). 
 
## Code of conduct

ELL has adopted the [Microsoft Open Source Code of Conduct](https://opensource.microsoft.com/codeofconduct/). For more information on this code of conduct, see the [Code of Conduct FAQ](https://opensource.microsoft.com/codeofconduct/faq/) or contact [opencode@microsoft.com](mailto:opencode@microsoft.com) with any additional questions or comments.



